(upbeat music)
So for those of you that know me,
I have probably mentioned linear once, twice,
maybe five dozen times.
It is a product that I've been obsessed with
for several years.
One, and for two reasons, really.
The first one being the business is fairly interesting.
I think they took a strategy that is pretty counter
to what most of the advice that you hear today is.
And it's influenced pretty much everything I do.
And then two, I believe that it's actually
probably the best web app that I have ever seen.
I have far margin, particularly because they use
a fairly unique architecture that is not really well known
and is quite different from where, like the status quo
and what generally web developers think about.
So with that teaser, I'd like to welcome
Tomas Artman, co-founder and CTO of linear.
How are you doing today?
- Doing good. Thanks so much for having me.
- For those of you that don't know,
linear is a project management tool.
And this is not a unique idea every developer in the world
has probably at some point hated their project management
tool has had an idea to start a new one.
There are dozens, if not, and maybe 100,
I don't know what the market size is.
Not a unique idea at all.
So it feels weird to start a company saying,
I am going to build yet another project management tool.
And it's shocking to see that that actually
was quite successful.
So I'd love to hear about the original,
kind of at the beginning, when you chose to find a company,
what was the mindset?
How are you guys thinking about it?
- It was actually pretty interesting.
It took us a while to sort of get behind the idea
of doing project management or software for project management.
'Cause ultimately, like in the beginning,
we thought it was a pretty boring space to be in.
Like the founders, we all came from sort of consumer companies.
I was working at Uber back in the day.
Jory was at Coinbase and Kari was at Airbnb.
And we started talking probably like six years ago now
with Jory about sort of the state of issue tracking
and project management at all of these companies.
I think Uber was using Fabricator for sort of engineering.
They were moving, essentially over to Jira,
just after I left.
Coinbase was using, I think, GitHub issues,
but moved over to Jira as well pretty quickly.
And Airbnb was on Jira from the get-go.
And so I think it was me and Jory
who started talking about sort of like the sense
that we have gotten from the state of project management
at these product companies.
And we sort of felt that ICs really didn't enjoy
and didn't like what they were using.
And it was usually mandated by sort of product management
or project managers or middle management.
And then sort of engineers in your ICs
just had to use whatever tool the middle management
came up with.
And we continued hearing from all these different companies
that we just randomly chatted with
that ICs really were underserved by the issue tracking needs
or by the needs of their project management.
Like two ICs project management is very different
than for your product managers or managers per se
'cause you're just working off of a list of things
that you need to do.
So your visibility and your sort of interaction
with the tool is much more constrained
than when you're planning out what you wanna build
at a large company.
And it seemed to us that none of the existing tools
were really servicing the market of ICs.
And for the longest time we're just sort of wondering
about why nobody has tackled the market
from the side of the IC.
Why nobody has come up with a tool for ICs
and tool that ICs will be happy to use.
And it seemed like sort of a great market opportunity
and great opportunity to build something
you would immediately have quite a few customers
in the smaller segment.
Like if you started targeting smaller startups
or companies with less than 50 employees,
you would sort of be able to quite quickly
come up with a product that would be useful for them.
And it took us a while to actually jump on this
'cause as I said, like we found the idea
of working on project management for the next years,
quite boring.
And the space itself wasn't really enticing to us.
And even more when we talked with Kari,
Kari was even more sort of not very interested
in the space being a designer himself.
But I don't know what's led to the realization
but we at some point understood that it's not really
about project management or issue tracking or any of that.
There's an underlying mission behind
sort of what we actually wanted to achieve
which was helping product companies
be better at building and shipping product.
And that felt like something that we could sink our teeth
into and that we felt was much more interesting
and was a mission that we could get behind
and work on for the next 10 or so years.
And with that realization, we started sort of
to sink our teeth into issue tracking at first
'cause again, that's the way to get to the market
is to build an issue tracker
'cause you immediately had all the smaller startups
that would enjoy using the products and where
the product could be useful.
And once you started working with the startups,
those people are usually very vocal
and you can sort of easily chat with them
and sort of understand, get understanding what they need
and startups hopefully grow as time passes.
So as they grow, so that's our functionality
and features that need to grow as well.
So from the start, I think we call ourselves
an issue tracker for the first two years of our existence.
But if you always knew that we wanted to do something,
something different, something more than project management,
issue tracking and even something more than project
management, we wanted to change how companies build product.
And in a sense, that was sort of a selfish
selfish mission as well 'cause we're users of software
and we sort of have these pivotal moments in our lives
when we've used new hardware or new software
that has literally changed our lives
like the first time we saw iOS for example
and used iOS ourselves felt super magical.
Not so much in the recent 10 years,
like we don't think much has happened.
I don't know why, but maybe it is because, yeah,
people have become less good at building products
or trying to do new things.
And we just thought that if you can build an issue tracker
that feels magical and feels like an application
that people would look up to, then there's really no reason
for anybody else to sort of do something less good.
If your issue tracker is something that you enjoy using
and that you look up to as a piece of software,
then hopefully that is a motivation for you as well
to build better software.
- Yeah, and I can't understand how true that ended up being.
Like I said, we started, so prior to using linear
for everything, the initial point you made about
a lack of focus on ICs is a really good one.
I tried a bunch of tools and we actually settled
on just using Airtable because we couldn't really find a tool
that as an IC, typically what you wanna see is you wake up,
you see the list of tasks for you in like a very clear way
and you can not come out.
And then as someone that's in a different role,
you need to see like a cross and plan across people
and you're right, like very few tools really just thought
about it in that simple way.
And we just ended up using Airtable
because we were able to create the views that we needed
for the project managers and the views that we needed
for the day-to-day.
So finding linear was excellent
'cause it kind of served exactly those two purposes.
And yeah, like once we started using it,
I was like, this tool is so good.
Why have I never cared about all these little details
that they got right?
And my software just kind of became better.
Like once you see it, you can't unsee it.
Now that I know that it exists,
like am I really gonna not shoot for something
of that quality?
So yeah, I don't know why it hasn't been as common,
but it might be as simple as like just people
just weren't thinking about it.
And now that they're thinking about it,
there's kind of like a breakthrough.
So yeah, I think that intention has only been successful.
- Yeah, I know it's easy to sort of, you know, not know
or not care about the user experience.
Like when you're looking for product market fit,
like you're not, you don't want to sort of, you know,
spend your time, you know, polishing the product
when you don't know if you're gonna succeed or not.
And, you know, maybe that then becomes sort of the norm
where like, because you never have cared, you know,
too much about this bit and polish of your product.
You just, you know, don't remember to do it once you actually
have a following and moment you have users.
- Yeah, that's actually exactly what I was referring
to the beginning.
The level of detail and polish that linear has
is quite opposite to most advice that you get, right?
You know, don't waste time on that stuff
when you don't even know if your business
is gonna be successful.
But what's different about linear is
that is the differentiator, right?
Of course, there's a lot more than just that.
There's a lot of thought into the product,
but a key differentiator and key advantage
and key edge that you have is the fact that it's very good.
And I think prior to me seeing linear,
I never realized that that could just be the thing
that you differentiate on.
Did you guys realize that very early on?
Like was that intentionally the initial pitch?
Like when you were pitching investors, et cetera.
And did people understand that?
That was literally the reason why we started linear.
Like just like the market existed.
Like we weren't inventing anything new.
Like Jira had been around for 20 years at that point already.
And there were like, you know,
hundreds of different project management tools.
And our, you know, idea from the get go
was just to be better, like, you know,
better to the user, better as a user experience,
better in all kinds of things.
And, you know, we care deeply about the product,
like, you know, the founders.
Like we've always sort of, you know,
have been interested in design and good UX and all of that.
And, you know, part of our careers have been built on that as well.
So it was sort of, you know, easy to get started with that.
And like I do remember, like when we started,
like we started prototyping just on the weekends
on, you know, what would an issue tracker look like.
And we still have the history of like the first ticket
that we, or the first, first issue that we put into linear,
it was sort of built the command menu,
which is kind of silly thing to do if you don't have a product,
like, you know, start with building out a command menu.
But we were, you know, keen on figuring out
whether we can build something on the web that felt,
you know, more like an application.
And obviously superhuman was out back then.
That was a big inspiration for us to look at their command menu,
keyboard shortcuts and, you know,
try to build something that felt like a true native application
on the web.
And yeah, like from the get go, we knew that, you know,
we weren't, you know, building anything new,
but the way for us to win the market would be to just be better.
So pens sort of the focus on quality and UX.
- So I don't know when you started raising money,
but in the process, in the early process of pitching
and explaining that, did investors understand that concept
or did it seem like we were able to show something
to prove that or did they kind of have to go on your word?
- I mean, we had an easy time raising money.
Like, I keep on saying that, you know,
the experience of building linear has been a very, you know,
easy and different one.
Like usually, you know, startup comes with ups and downs.
We've been just sort of coasting upwards.
Like there have been no sort of, you know,
bigger problems or challenges to begin with,
which is, you know, super strange.
Like I think we got, you know, just, you know, hugely lucky.
So yeah, like our fundraising for a seed round
was, you know, literally just a few weeks.
And it was not of our own accord.
Like we initially didn't want to raise money,
like we wanted to build, essentially a prototype,
you know, just bootstrap it, get a few customers
and have a product that sort of, you know,
exemplified on what we want to build.
And then, you know, if need be, go ahead and raise money.
But, you know, as it turned out, Sequoia,
sort of, you know, was scouring through LinkedIn
and sort of found out that, you know, you know,
one guy from Uber and one from Airbnb
and one from Kanye's have founded the company.
And they've, you know, put out a blog post
and, you know, Twitter is, you know, a bit abuzz about,
you know, what they're building.
So they reached out to us and then sort of was, you know,
rather quick at sort of, you know, getting the seed in.
So we didn't really have to explain too much,
or, you know, show the product because we, you know,
back then, we didn't have anything to show for.
Like, yeah, we did have a few prototypes.
We did have a few designs.
And I'm sure Kari put them on the deck.
But it was very early.
But, you know, I think they, you know,
believed in the same vision of, like, you know,
first targeting ICs, building an upwards from there
and just building a product that people enjoy using.
- Cool.
So switching gears, something else that you said.
So a key part of building something like linear is,
it's not just a product.
You also need to think about what your opinion
on the right way to build products is.
And you kind of bake some of that philosophy into products.
And I think linear also has like,
I forgot what you guys call it.
You have like an actual document with the linear approaches.
What was it?
Remember what it was called?
- Yeah, we have the linear method.
- Linear method, exactly.
Was that something you discovered as you built the product
or upfront, did you guys kind of all like find alignment on,
on that?
- The method itself was something,
and it's still in flux.
Like we haven't completed the method yet.
Like it's something that we someday want to,
want to finish up and get closure on.
But in the beginning, like, we did have this idea of like,
you know, we don't want to build just a product.
Like we want to have some sort of, you know,
mission statement or idea or methodology behind it.
And that same came from the, from the,
from the insight that we had when, you know,
we were working at these, these larger companies
that people looked up to when they,
when they were building products.
And you sort of all realized that, you know,
none of the internal teams really knew how to build product
or what the methodology was.
Like everybody, you know, depending on team,
you usually use something akin to scrum.
And when you ask people like, you know,
why, why are you using scrum or why you're sprinting?
You know, people wouldn't really know what the answer was.
And they were like, no, I don't know.
Everybody does it like this.
So I guess, you know, it's, it's for development.
So it makes sense.
And I thought, well, it always wanted to range that, you know,
scrum has been invented for a very different world.
Like scrum, it actually was, was made when you had sort
of a non-technical customer and a technical team.
And the non-technical customer wanted working software
from the technical team.
And the technical team didn't want the customer to sort
of get involved when they were actually working on stuff.
And so, you know, you came up with this with this framework
that worked for both companies before the customer
and the technical team.
And, you know, every four weeks or so,
the customer would get something out of it.
And for the rest of the time, the customer would sort of,
you know, give the, give the team space to implement
whatever, you know, was asked for.
And that's not how product companies work nowadays anymore.
Like there sort of needs to be a different,
different way of building product that makes much more sense
for the, for the, for the current world where like you have
integrated teams within the company building their own software.
- Yeah. And especially at smaller companies,
this thing where it's a good point about the customer
not being super involved, like kind of giving space.
And that's what it was designed for.
This is exactly the issue I had with a lot of the approach
earlier in my career with companies that are building software.
You would plan out something like some kind of like long,
longer-term thing we're going to do exactly X, Y, and Z things.
And then three days later, your customer,
you would have an interaction with the customer
and you would get suddenly really excited to solve some problem
that wasn't on your roadmap.
Because when you're not, when you're not talking about your
customers, all issues kind of seem equal.
But the moment like someone has a problem,
suddenly an issue is like the top of your mind.
So yeah, having that flexibility, I think the reality is,
and I've only ever worked at really, really stage companies.
It's very hard to know what you're going to be excited about
week to week.
So a lot of these tools were about like locking in
these long-term plans.
And I found that that almost never, never really worked out.
And it's almost like building it water-fully,
which was what Scrum--
Wasn't supposed to not do.
In the beginning, but yeah, it was trying to avoid.
Yeah, yeah, maybe my experience as well.
Everyone is doing agile, but if you actually look at what
they're doing, it's like, yeah, it's entirely a waterfall
process.
Yeah, so I think that's really awesome where there's like a
whole document teaching you how to build product.
So the three of you came from at least the last--
I'm sure you've had other experience before, but the
last job you were at prior to founding this was at bigger
companies.
So when you're kind of developing this method, did you feel
like there is a trade-off with what works, smart companies,
what works in bigger companies?
Or do you generally find that there actually is a good
approach that works pretty well for everyone?
I mean, no approach works the same for everybody.
And I think people, when they look at the linear method and
what we've described there, it is common sense stuff.
It is not very descriptive for the plain reason that you
have to take it and sort of make it your own, because no
companies is alike.
But the idea was that there's nothing inherently in building
a product that would be different at a large company
and a small company.
I think the method and the way of working still works
regardless of size, rather than getting teams of hundreds
of engineers, companies tend to break up teams into smaller
pieces and work on functionality individually.
So if you have a small company, just have less stuff that
you're working on at the moment.
If you have a larger company, you've got more initiatives,
but they need to themselves work in the same way.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Yeah, because I think a lot of times when companies see how
a smaller company operates, they might think that could never
work for us, because we're big, or they'll have some reason.
But I think I've found that, yes, it's not exactly the same,
but roughly the principles are the same.
It's usually the low level principles that you need to get
right.
And when things are broken, it's usually not--
it's true because you're not following some of those ideas.
So that's a lot on linear as a business, the product.
But my audience is mostly engineers.
I'm trying to get them thinking more about those things.
I'd love to talk about stuff in that category.
But let's get into some of the technical details, right?
With linear, when you're using the product,
every interaction you do is near instant.
Or it's the answer you probably can't tell.
So whether that's something simple, like marking an issue
is done, or something more complicated,
like searching through all your open issues, every key
stroke, instant response.
And I think I remember initially the landing page--
or at some point, landing page, like, very clearly said there.
Maybe you continue to say that.
When was that, like, the perspective?
When did you guys decide that that was the perspective you
wanted?
That was a good rule.
You needed to have instant reaction times, everything.
Again, from the get-go, before we even started working
on anything, the way we started prototyping
and issue tracker were the first sort of prototype of linear.
I had spent, I don't know, eight, nine years working on mobile.
And I was totally burned out by mobile native engineering.
Even before we decided to start working on the linear,
I took a few weekends to sort of double with web technologies,
which I had sort of done 10 years prior.
But a lot of stuff had happened in between.
And I was totally unaware of technology stack of web
when I started going around.
And I had done a few sort of synchronization engines before.
And just thinking about the idea of if you had an issue
tracker, what would you want it to be?
And I always wanted to build an application that
was fully built on a synchronization stack.
I tried it at Uber.
When I joined Uber, I built a synchronization engine for them.
I was a bit too late.
Like the company was hyper-growing.
We did have sort of a Swift client and a Java client
and a JavaScript client out and a go implementation
for the server to do full synchronization on the Uber stack.
But the company was just going so fast.
And nobody else sort of shared the same mission.
So I wasn't able to sort of push it through.
To this day, I still think that Uber would have been much
better off if they had adopted some sort of sync technology.
Because for the next three years, they
were sort of trying to do something similar with much
various results, and something that just took them
a long time to do.
Because it wasn't natively built in
into any of the mobile stacks.
So I had this idea that the next project that I
wanted to be mobile or be web, I wanted to do it on sync.
So when I started toying around with this issue tracker
in my back head, I just wanted to try out
synchronization technologies on the web.
And that was literally the first sort of prototype
that I did, like how can I do sort of a very simple issue
tracker that was real-time synchronous across multiple clients.
And when we saw it, it was Jory and I sort of hacking
on these things back in the day.
And when we saw it working, it just
thought, you know, absolutely fantastic.
And you could imagine, like, you know,
with synchronization, like, you can be in an offline state,
like, where every single operation essentially
happens on the client, and then sort of the transactions
get sent out to the server, you know, behind the scenes.
And if you can build your application in a way where
every operation is optimistic, where sort of the client
can fathom that, you know, this operation will succeed
on the back end, then you can be optimistic on the client as well.
So when you do an operation on the client,
you can already apply it on the local state
and, you know, present the view as it will be, you know,
a few seconds from now when the server accepts this change,
because so few transactions actually, you know,
get reverted on the back end.
And with that in mind, like, we were able to build a sort
of a quick prototype that just showed how quick, you know,
your application can be.
When you start building out things, like, everything is fast,
right, like, your first program will always be fast
because you run it on your local computer.
But we sort of knew that, you know, the speed
won't really drop from here, like, the architecture itself,
lend itself to be real-time always, right,
regardless of how much data you had
or how big your application grew.
And we just thought that, you know,
that was the best user experience that you could build.
And starting with the idea, like, you know,
once we started working on a linear,
like, we knew that we just, you know,
needed to build something better.
So it was sort of an obvious choice to go
with full synchronization.
So that we could build an application
that was just super fast.
- Yeah, so just for clarity for people
that are just not in the context.
So when you say syncing, this is a architecture pattern
that linear follows, where a large portion
of your working set of data is actually synced locally
so that all the operations are happening locally.
So when you're doing search, it's searching
off of what's in your browser.
It's not making remote calls every time you press a keystroke.
And this applies to, you know, all the actions that you take.
It's a very different architecture.
I think I've seen it now called as a local first architecture.
I think it's different than like,
I think people conflate this with like offline apps.
I don't think linear is really meant to be used
like fully offline.
I'm sure a lot of it will work.
But it's not really for the use it
when you don't have internet reason.
It's more for, if you can sync a large set of the data locally,
everything can be really, really fast
because there's no remote call.
And it doesn't matter if your server is potentially slow
or if you have a lot of different users on your server.
Most operations are hitting it asynchronously.
And that's kind of the idea behind the sync engine.
I think you guys call it, right?
And I've seen this pattern show up more,
but it's still rarely deployed.
I think there's very few applications I see
that takes approach.
And I think oftentimes when I describe it to people,
they immediately think that can't work.
Like there's no way that could work
or like sync the whole day is that locally,
what do you mean, that's like too much data?
So do you have any thoughts on kind of
like that initial reaction that people have?
- Yeah, I mean, it totally depends on your application
whether it can work or not.
Like, you know, local first or sync
or whatever you wanna call it.
Works for when you have a finite set of data
that you can load to the clients almost fully.
Like we started with a full synchronization.
Like when the client would put it for the first time,
they would load the entire state of that workspace locally.
And it worked for two or three years.
And then we got sort of bigger customers
where we couldn't load the entire data set anymore
because it was 200, 300 megabytes of data.
So we had to sort of implement something
that still felt like you had all the data locally
from sort of the engineer's perspective,
but behind the scenes we would sort of stream data
in if needed.
But like, yeah, if you wanna do, I don't know,
like an application with a lot of data
that sort of changes all the time
that synchronization probably isn't the best use case
for you.
But if you have a finite set of data,
like if you're working on what you normally,
or 20 years ago would have built as a sort of
desktop application that had sort of a remote backend
where you would then store the data
or synchronize the data to.
Then yes, synchronization can definitely work for you.
The one thing that sort of we got surprised
as ourselves as well was like the benefit of it.
Like we initially thought that, you know,
the user would get the benefit.
The user would sort of, you know,
get an application that was super fast and they did.
But I think like the biggest benefit for us as a company
was that we were just, you know,
extremely quick at, you know,
iterating on the product itself.
'Cause suddenly like you didn't have a web app anymore,
like you remember not working on an application
where you had to sort of, you know,
do remote procedure calls or, you know,
think about error handling on the backend
or sort of, you know, sanitizing your data
or whatever is involved in sending data to the backend
and then, you know, receiving it.
But literally what you had once Zoom was implemented
was sort of a local structure of, you know, of data
representing the state of your application.
And that was all that you had to work with.
You never had to go to the backend.
You never had to literally do anything
'cause, you know, the sync engine would handle
all of it for you.
You didn't have to think about error cases
'cause the sync engine, again,
would handle most of these error cases for you automatically.
So you were just like, you had a local set of data,
you would manipulate that data
and, you know, eventually you would call save
on, you know, some of the objects
that you actually wanted to commit to.
And that was all you needed to do.
So when you wanted to build a feature,
you just essentially, you know, add it to that data,
showed it in your UI and you were done.
It makes it so much faster to build, you know,
build the product.
And I think, you know, it's one of the biggest reasons
why we're so quick at, you know, shipping,
new functionality later.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, that's been, that's been my experience as well.
It's a little bit of set up initially
to get everything set up correctly.
And it's a little bit of a mental model shift
'cause it's quite different from how most people
build things.
But once that's done and we just,
so we hit, we released a V1, a beta of our new product.
And that was a good amount of effort,
a good amount of concentrated effort.
This past week, we've just been adding new features
on top of it.
It's been insanely fast.
Like, like, I'd allocate like two days to do something.
I would finish it in two hours.
You know, it's kind of like, it's not just a slight
improvement, it's like a multiple improvement.
It's really, really incredible.
The other thing that you mentioned is
the finite set of data.
I think this is pretty interesting
because I think when people hear that,
they might think, oh, it's a very narrow use case.
That fits like, 'cause obviously data is always growing.
It's always changing.
But you can be pretty creative about what that means, right?
So with linear, obviously your issues can grow forever
for all of time, right?
So you would think that's not finite.
But practically, there is like a working set
of issues that you care about.
You know, there's maybe, maybe you expire out issues.
I don't know what exactly what linear logic is,
but maybe you expire out issues
that have been closed that are more than 30 days old.
And it's unlikely that that set of data
is gonna grow infinitely 'cause you're the rate
that your team creates issues probably is staying the same.
So I think a lot of applications actually can work
under this model because you have natural ways
of partitioning things, like B2B applications like linear.
You're not thinking all the customer's issues,
just your own workspace's issues, right?
And even like B2C applications, like you said, Uber,
it's not a social app.
You're not like downloading everyone else's information.
It's just your own information and your own trips.
So that does cover like a good portion of use cases, right?
- It does, and to give you an example
of sort of the finite data set of Uber.
Uber, you know, when I joined, they were using what, you know,
they called, hopefully it's no longer there.
They called Ping, which was a Ping to the server
every three seconds that would fetch all the data
that the user could ever see.
I included sort of user accounts and trips and past trips
and future trips and everything.
And they would sort of ping the server
every three seconds with that.
So they sort of almost were on Cinq,
just a very sort of bad Cinq.
'Cause they would, you know, every single time
sort of get the entire set set of data.
So yes, most applications, if you're not talking
about sort of the social graph of sorts,
do have a finite set of data.
And even, you know, even in linear,
where you're constrained to one workspace at a time,
we still, within that workspace,
are able to partition the data.
You know, they were sort of kind of optimize
what we load in the beginning and what not to load.
So we do load everything that sort of has some sort of,
you know, finite, you know, finite set,
which is sort of your teams and your users
and your not the issues.
Like teams, users, organizations and labels
and things that sort of, we have under 1000s off issues.
You know, we do see customers who have, you know,
hundreds of thousands of issues.
So we don't want to load them all.
'Cause they're usually associated with a team.
And, you know, if you have a large organization,
like you will only be part of a few teams here and there.
So it's not necessary for you to load up, you know,
the issues of all teams in order to, you know,
have them locally available.
You can do that dynamically.
Like when you, you know, when you look into a team
that you haven't looked in a while,
we can load up the issues of that team at that point.
Even if you go into sort of the issue itself,
like we've got comments and issue history,
which are only available and visible in just a few screens.
So we're selective of, you know, not loading them at startup,
just to get you to the first UI as quickly as possible,
even if you're starting with a cold client.
But when you then sort of navigate to a team,
in the background, we start streaming in the data
that, you know, we anticipate that you'll need
in the future.
And first case, like if you look at an issue
and you haven't loaded any of the data,
you'll see a blank screen, a quick loading screen
for like half a second and then, you know,
data streams in 'cause, you know, it gets prioritized
of what we load at that point in time.
From a sort of engineering perspective,
the easiest way to build an application would be
that everything is local and actually in memory,
'cause then you don't need to sort of work
with asynchronous data.
You would have just a struct of, you know,
in memory data and you could just render your UI
as you please.
The moment when, you know, things can pop in, you know,
you need to work around it a bit and sort of, you know,
account for that, you know, you might not be able to show
some UI elements or some UI elements might pop in, you know,
few milliseconds later after your initial render
because you need to hydrate them either from this score,
you know, go to the network.
So it becomes a bit more problematic, but, you know,
it's still, you know, quite quite easy to implement.
- Yeah, exactly.
And it's kind of like, like 80% of your stuff,
it's on that first case and it's kind of like,
it's kind of diminishes, like there are some cases
where you need to handle it specifically.
So me and my wife also, we work on another app together
and it's very similar, like 95% of the day-to-day usage
of the app fits into that very simple.
Everything is local, operation running locally model.
But there are, you know, some situations where they're
looking at reporting and they're looking at larger,
they're asking larger questions of the app.
And for there, we'll fall back to something more traditional.
But to me, it's like progressive.
Like you try to do it locally, if not,
then you kind of progress to the more network-powered things.
And you'll find that, yeah, most, most data operations
can exist locally.
So one of the questions that I get a lot,
and I actually see in the chat right now is,
I think when people hear this model, they think like,
words like CRDTs or like kind of eventual consistency.
But it's quite different, right?
Sinking is very different than like collaborative,
conflict resolution type stuff.
Do you have any thoughts on the differences there?
- Yeah, sure.
Like, so we beat them, use CRDTs for the longest time.
We're actually implementing final CRDTs
for our description editor.
Hopefully, we'll have it live at some point.
Because that was literally the only point in the application
where it didn't feel like being real-time yet.
But if you look at an issue, for example,
like an issue can have a priority.
And if you modify that priority, like, there's
nothing related to CRDTs that you can do there.
Like somebody sets that priority, and the last one will win.
If I set it to high and you set it to medium,
but should it actually be, like, CRDTs can't resolve that for you
and sort of set it to medium plus or something.
So for the most of the properties on our model objects,
like we just utilized the last one wins schema,
we don't even show you any conflicts.
Like if people flip it at the same time,
like we don't show you that, you know, it was just changed
as you made the change because it's really not that necessary.
And people very infrequently modify the same data,
even if you're at a large company.
But yeah, like the editor was the last piece
that we always felt wasn't great.
And we've postponed it for a pretty long time.
Like it's been on our backlog for, I think, three years.
And we always wanted to make a sort of fully collaborative
editor that utilized CRDTs so that multiple people can
edit it at the same time, see all the changes coming in,
and sort of have conflict resolution in the editor itself.
But we just realized that it's not that many people
that edit issue descriptions at the same time,
so it wasn't really a priority for us.
Now that we want to use the editor for a few other things,
where we do anticipate that there will be multiple people
joining into a session, you know, we want to make
that use case work well as well.
And just use CRDTs for text editing.
- Yeah, it's funny, right before you joined,
someone asked the question, hey, can you ask them why,
I think that there's a linear docs feature,
why the editing there goes off.
And I actually guessed that it was exactly this.
So I'm gonna take the mantle that I know more about linear
than anyone that hasn't worked there.
So I've just looked at it so much.
But yeah, so that kind of confirms that question,
which is, again, it goes to that like 80/20 thing,
like 80% of your application is not collaborative
real-time editing, which is very simple data synchronizing.
And there's a small portion that does need that,
and you can kind of progressively look into that.
I think the thing that people kind of conflate this stuff is,
when they hear this, they think about,
oh, is it like peer-to-peer?
It's like that type of situation,
but it's not peer-to-peer, it looks somewhat similar
'cause you're synchronizing states.
The difference between peer-to-peer and this is there's
a very important peer, which is the server,
which has ultimate authority on when something happened,
what order happened in, what's the last thing that happened.
So when you have that in play,
which is how most web apps work,
most web apps aren't really peer-to-peer applications,
you don't need the complexity of CRDTs
to the majority of things.
So you have this authoritative server
that can determine authoritative states,
and it massively simplifies everything.
So this isn't as complicated as people may have seen
with kind of peer-to-peer technologies.
- For sure, yeah.
And like, you could make linear peer-to-peer network as well,
but I don't know what the benefits would be.
Like, even with our current model, like when we run,
which was like the third thing that we got out of sync,
interestingly enough is, you know,
hugely smaller resource requirements on the backend.
Like, we're running this, you know,
with so few servers that, you know, you could hardly imagine.
'Cause most of the operations again,
happen on the client, like there's no queries
that the client sends to the backend.
So it's only mutations essentially being, you know,
saved or, you know, being operated on, on the backend.
And you do still want to sort of, you know,
do all kinds of validation and, you know,
have an API where people can sort of submit
the same mutations as well.
So, you know, we need a backend for those operations.
- Yeah, there's another thing that we've noticed as well.
I think before performance work looked like
trying to make my backend faster,
trying to make my database faster,
trying to like make all those response times faster.
I haven't thought about that in so long.
I have no idea how slow my backend is.
It could be super slow for all I know,
but you just cannot tell when you're using the application.
So yeah, I always find it's interesting
where I think when people think about performance,
they think about optimizing like very specific things.
Like I'm going to optimize this code block
or I'm going to make my database faster,
like these individual components.
But performance oftentimes just comes from your architecture.
Like what is architecture you chose
that can make certain things really easy,
other things really hard.
And yeah, it's quite fascinating
because I think right now if you look at,
I mean, it's hard to say what is the correct source for this,
but if I look at the conversations that a lot of
web developers are having,
it's all about optimizing server rendering speed
and building these server rendered applications
or like, you know, building new frameworks
that are more performance.
And I love to point to them that, you know, linear,
which is feels as a user feels way more performance
than majority of applications.
And correct me if I'm wrong on this,
it's just a React application
and it's just a traditional SPA, right?
Nothing fancy going on there.
- No, it's straight up.
Well, sure, like we have, you know,
optimized it and made sure that performance, you know,
on the client is good.
So a lot of work goes in there.
- Yeah, but it's like just the same technology
that's been around for a while,
just, you know, implemented in an architecture
that allows it to be really fast.
And yeah, that's why I've been excited to talk to you
and kind of make this more,
make me more aware of this because,
yeah, there's just a gap.
Have you seen more companies now that you guys are out there
doing it with this approach?
Have you seen more companies take this approach?
I'm telling you like, we're doing it,
but have you seen it grow a little bit more?
- I mean, not really.
I would assume that, you know, startups that start,
you know, are founded nowadays
would have a look at synchronization.
Like if it's a good use case for them,
I haven't personally sort of, you know, used,
I don't wanna say any apps that do synchronization,
but you know, most of the applications that I use
probably don't, I wouldn't know if they do.
Yeah, yeah, I don't know.
Hopefully it will just take time, you know,
for people to sort of start toying around with this.
The problem is that, you know,
when you're building something
where you really don't have product market fit,
it's insane to start with this synchronization engine.
Like it's kind of wasteful and useless,
like to throw it all away, all that hard engineering.
It's not, it is hard engineering.
Like it takes you time to build a good, you know,
synchronization engine.
And the off the shelf solutions, you know,
might work for smaller companies,
but at some point, like you'll have to build yourself,
you know, to optimize the use case for your users.
So it's a big investment.
And if you don't know, like, you know,
what your product is, it's going to be,
or whether it's gonna take off then, you know,
you probably don't want to make that investment.
And once your product takes off, like, you know,
it might be too late to make that investment already.
- Yeah, exactly.
That's why the business part ties in really well, right?
You guys were entering a very established clear market.
You weren't trying to create a new market,
various established market.
And very clear that your entire edge
that you're going to have is the execution.
So it made sense to kind of invest upfront.
So speaking of off the shelf solutions,
have you heard of Replicash?
- I have, yeah.
- So we, that's what we use for our products.
And it was interesting because, you know,
I've been researching linear for a while.
I was like, okay, how am I going to do this?
And I was looking around,
and eventually stumbled upon it.
And on their homepage, their demo is a linear cloud.
And I was like, this is the best way to advertise,
'cause this is what everyone is looking for,
or not everyone.
Again, really small set of people
that I think have discovered this are interested in this,
but I'm fairly excited about that.
And I think this is what I love to see in technology
where it wasn't solution-led.
I found a product that I loved.
And I loved it so much that I just had to know
how it was built.
And I imagine the Replicash founders
also probably saw linear at some point.
You kind of see the approach proved out in a product
for the end user.
Then you kind of build a solution afterward
that can make it more accessible to more people.
I think a lot of times we see solutions kind of put forth
and you're like, that looks cool,
but I haven't actually, like what,
like show me a product built with it,
show me why it actually feels good to user,
what's a cool thing you can build with it.
And this is a great example of a going in the direction
that I think actually makes sense, right?
So I'm pretty optimistic for Replicash.
Again, like you said, I can already see in places
where we're gonna outgrow it in some ways,
but just to make that initial,
you don't have to build your own sync engine.
It's still, and I wanna make this clear
for everyone listening, it's hard.
Even when you're using an off-the-shelf solution,
it's just very different from what you're used to.
And it does take effort,
but if your goal is to out execute everyone else,
it's just gonna take effort, right?
But it's definitely worth it, in my opinion.
- Cool, yeah, you know, people should definitely look into it.
And like, obviously there's other solutions as well,
like Firebase being the oldest one of them all.
Like that was actually, you know,
one of the initial sort of proofs of concept
that we did, like my first implementation
was on coach base.
- I'm sorry, coach base, coach base, coach base.
- And then, then all that.
- Yeah, exactly, yeah, coach DB.
And then Firebase as well.
And we sort of quickly realized that, you know,
they wouldn't work for us.
Like, I think coach DB, you know,
just didn't have any access control.
Back then, I don't know if they do now.
And then Firebase, like, we did a small quick calculation
on the costs and, you know, our use case
would have been costs us, you know, millions of dollars
to access the load of all of that data.
So it wouldn't have worked for us.
But it might work for you.
Like if you're working, you know, on something small
and you want to just, you know, add synchronization as,
and add on to a portion of your application, like, you know,
yes, go ahead with, you know, existing solutions
and try to, you know, start there
and see how we can benefit from losing.
- Okay, so people did ask, is it long pulling?
Like, what's the actual tech stack
that you guys use for synchronization?
So I think you've given a few talks
and it's probably what documented,
but if you can kind of just list it out here.
- Yeah, yeah, there's, I do have a few talks
on how, you know, our sync engine works.
But essentially what we have is a WebSocket connection
for all this synchronization stuff.
And then mutations still have been on a GraphQL connection
or a GraphQL request essentially that we make.
'Cause we want to have the same backend
for the public API and then our clients.
We didn't want to duplicate it.
So if you make a change on the client,
client will create a transaction,
send that over, you know, over GraphQL
to the backend and the backend will create a sort
of log of changes that happen to your workspace
and then send those changes back
to the user over the WebSocket connection.
So you'll be receiving all the changes that you've made
and all the changes that everybody else has made
through WebSockets.
- Yeah, and that's what's interesting
'cause it's, you guys do use GraphQL under the hood.
So it's a marriage of the synchronization
but still relying on like the type safety
and all other benefits you get from GraphQL.
Yeah, 'cause like you said, I think most companies
will need a lot of companies,
especially if you're building for other companies,
you're gonna need an API,
just having something that makes sense internally
and externally does make a lot of sense.
Okay, cool.
So I think that's really everything I had.
Thank you so much for joining.
This was really awesome.
Like I said, I just want more people to know
about how this stuff works under the hood
and it kind of be inspired to do the same.
Again, thank you for joining,
but also thank you for building linear.
Like I said, it's hugely influential
on everything that I do today,
which sounds like is what you guys hope that out to do.
So hopefully it's a nice data point.
Yeah, that's so great to hear.
Yeah, so appreciate it.
Thanks so much for having me.
(upbeat music)